he Beginner's Guide to Writing an Essay | Steps & Examples

An academic essay is a focused piece of writing that develops an idea or argument using evidence, analysis, and interpretation.

There are many types of essays you might write as a student. The content and length of an essay depends on your level, subject of study, and course requirements. However, most essays at university level are argumentative—they aim to persuade the reader of a particular position or perspective on a topic.

The essay writing process consists of three main stages:

    Preparation: Decide on your topic, do your research, and create an essay outline.
    Writing: Set out your argument in the introduction, develop it with evidence in the main body, and wrap it up with a conclusion.
    Revision: Check the content, organization, grammar, spelling, and formatting of your essay.

In this guide, we walk you through what to include in the introduction, body, and conclusion of an academic essay, using paragraphs from our interactive essay example.
Table of contents

    Essay writing process
    Preparation for writing an essay
    Writing the introduction
    Writing the main body
    Writing the conclusion
    Essay checklist
    Lecture slides
    Frequently asked questions about writing an essay

Essay writing process

The writing process of preparation, writing, and revisions applies to every essay or paper, but the time and effort spent on each stage depends on the type of essay.

For example, if you’ve been assigned a five-paragraph expository essay for a high school class, you’ll probably spend the most time on the writing stage; for a college-level argumentative essay, on the other hand, you’ll need to spend more time researching your topic and developing an original argument before you start writing.
1. Preparation 	2. Writing 	3. Revision

    Define your essay topic
    Do your research and gather sources
    Come up with a thesis
    Create an essay outline



    Write the introduction
    Write the main body, organized into paragraphs
    Write the conclusion



    Evaluate the overall organization
    Revise the content of each paragraph
    Proofread your essay or use a Grammar Checker for language errors
    Use a plagiarism checker

Preparation for writing an essay

Before you start writing, you should make sure you have a clear idea of what you want to say and how you’re going to say it. There are a few key steps you can follow to make sure you’re prepared:

    Understand your assignment: What is the goal of this essay? What is the length and deadline of the assignment? Is there anything you need to clarify with your teacher or professor?
    Define a topic: If you’re allowed to choose your own topic, try to pick something that you already know a bit about and that will hold your interest.
    Do your research: Read primary and secondary sources and take notes to help you work out your position and angle on the topic. You’ll use these as evidence for your points.
    Come up with a thesis: The thesis is the central point or argument that you want to make. A clear thesis is essential for a focused essay—you should keep referring back to it as you write.
    Create an outline: Map out the rough structure of your essay in an outline. This makes it easier to start writing and keeps you on track as you go.

Once you’ve got a clear idea of what you want to discuss, in what order, and what evidence you’ll use, you’re ready to start writing.